Adding a guide on developing Template sample into a sensor application (#2)
krzysztofziobro/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/ug_creating_matter_accessory.rst

Application Clusters
********************

To add new functionalities to a Matter sample we need to add new application clusters.

Cluster is a representation of a single functionality within a Matter accessory.
Each cluster contains attributes which are stored in device's memory, and commands that can be used to modify or read the state of the device, including the cluster attributes.

An application can implement appropriate callback functions to be informed about specific cluster state changes. They can be used to alter device's behaviour when state of a cluster is changing
as a result of some external event.

Editing Clusters using ZAP tool
*******************************

| We need to add new clusters to represent functionality of an on/off switch and temperature sensor.
| In order to add new clusters you need to first modify ZAP file which can be found as :file:`src/template.zap`.

| To edit :file:`template.zap` run the command below with ``MATTER_ROOT`` replaced by a path to the root of Matter repository:
.. code-block:: 

        $MATTER_ROOT/scripts/tools/zap/run_zaptool.sh src/template.zap 
        

        

> | Where ``MATTER_ROOT`` is a path to the root of Matter repository.

Reviewer: Now it seems to be redundant with the sentence above :smiley:

> Creating Matter Sensor application from Matter Template sample

Reviewer 2: I think you can use the title corresponding with the file name: `Creating Matter accessory`. The description below will explain that a sensor device has been selected as an example. Also, add `.. ug_creating_matter_accessory:` before this line, so we can refer to the article in other READMEs.

##############################################################

> 

Reviewer 2: Add:
```
.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2
```

| In this tutorial you will learn how to create your own device application using Matter. 

> | We will show a way to modify Matter Template sample in order to obtain a sensor application.

Reviewer: I will let @greg-fer comment on that, however I think that we shouldn't use in documentation personal form, like "we", "our" and etc.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think that would be more aligned with other docs.

Our goal is to create a sensor, which, if active, periodically updates measured value.

Matter Template sample
**********************

| We will base our sensor device on a Matter Template sample which provides a basic implementation of a Matter accessory.
| Our first step in creating sensor device will be to copy content from :file:`samples/matter/template` to another place eg. :file:`samples/matter/sensor`.

> From now on, paths will be given with respect to :file:`samples/matter/sensor` directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From now on, paths will be given relative to :file:`samples/matter/sensor` directory.
```

Application Clusters
********************

To add new functionalities to a Matter sample we need to add new application clusters.

Cluster is a representation of a single functionality within a Matter accessory.

> Each cluster contains attributes which are stored in device's memory, and commands that can be used to modify or read the state of those attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each cluster contains attributes which are stored in device's memory, and commands that can be used to modify or read the state of the device, including the cluster attributes.
```
Some commands may not be related to any attributes.

> Information about changes in cluster's state is passed using a ZCL callback. It can be used to alter device's behaviour when state of a cluster is changing

Reviewer: In .rst files we have a one sentence - one line rule. So every sentence should be written in one line without newlines and another one started from a new line.

> Information about changes in cluster's state is passed using a ZCL callback. It can be used to alter device's behaviour when state of a cluster is changing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An application can implement appropriate callback functions to be informed about specific cluster state changes. They can be used to alter device's behaviour when state of a cluster is changing
```

as a result of some external event.

Editing Clusters using ZAP tool
*******************************

| We need to add new clusters to represent functionality of an on/off switch and temperature sensor.
| In order to add new clusters you need to first modify ZAP file which can be found as :file:`src/template.zap`.

> | To edit :file:`template.zap` run:

Reviewer: I would suggest to explain what is MATTER_ROOT here, not below the command, as many people will just paste it, without going down first. For example it could be:
```suggestion
| To edit :file:`template.zap` run the command below with ``MATTER_ROOT`` replaced by a path to the root of Matter repository:
```

.. ug_creating_matter_accessory: 

Creating Matter accessory
#########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

| This tutorial shows how to create a custom device application using Matter.     

> | It will show a way to modify Matter Template sample in order to obtain a sensor application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| It will show a way to modify :ref:`Matter Template <matter_template_sample>` sample in order to obtain a sensor application.
```

> The goal of this guide is to create a sensor, which, if active, periodically updates measured value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The goal of this guide is to create a temperature sensor with an on/off switch.
The sensor, if active, periodically updates its measured value.
```

Matter Template sample
**********************

> | The base for buiding a sensor device will be a Matter Template sample which provides a basic implementation of a Matter accessory.

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's worth adding something like:
"Before proceeding, make sure that you can build and test the Matter Template sample with no issues".

| First step in creating sensor device will be to copy content from :file:`samples/matter/template` to another place eg. :file:`samples/matter/sensor`.

From now on, paths will be given relative to :file:`samples/matter/sensor` directory.

Application Clusters
********************

> 

Reviewer 2: Add something like:
"At this point, the sample includes only mandatory Matter clusters, necessary to commission the accessory onto a Matter network."

Adding new functionalities to a Matter sample requires adding new application clusters.         

> Cluster is a representation of a single functionality within a Matter accessory.

Reviewer 2: Move this paragraph to the beginning of the section so that the cluster definition is before the text that refers to the term.

> Each cluster contains attributes which are stored in device's memory, and commands that can be used to modify or read the state of the device, including the cluster attributes.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this changing device state. It's somehow confusing to me. How about writing just:
```suggestion
Each cluster contains attributes which are stored in device's memory, and commands that can be used to modify or read those attributes values.
```

Reviewer 2: But that's not exactly right. Commands may or may not be related to the attributes. Maybe Greg will come up with a less confusing way to describe that fact.

Reviewer: Ok, if that is what you mentioned, I'm fine with that. I assumed that we want to mainly focus on reading attributes values, so calling it reading the device state was for me going too far. I think it can stay as it is.

An application can implement appropriate callback functions to be informed about specific cluster state changes. 
They can be used to alter device's behaviour when state of a cluster is changing as a result of some external event.

Editing Clusters using ZAP tool
*******************************

| Representing functionalities of an on/off switch and a sensor requires adding new clusters.
| Adding new application clusters can be achieved by modifying ZAP file, which can be found as :file:`src/template.zap`.       

> | To edit :file:`template.zap` run the command below with ``MATTER_ROOT`` replaced by a path to the root of Matter repository:

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I think I would use paths relative to the nRF Connect SDK root. Users may not know where the Matter repo is located within the SDK. That is, `nrfconnect-dir/modules/lib/matter/scripts/tools/zap/run_zaptool.sh src/template.zap`.

> | To edit :file:`template.zap` run the command below with ``MATTER_ROOT`` replaced by a path to the root of Matter repository:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| To edit :file:`src/template.zap` run the command below with ``MATTER_ROOT`` replaced by a path to the root of Matter repository:
```

.. code-block:: 

        $MATTER_ROOT/scripts/tools/zap/run_zaptool.sh src/template.zap 
        

> | First, add a new endpoint representing a sensor device:

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to add somewhere a description that "an endpoint in Matter is an addressable container for clusters appropriate for a single device type such as a sensor or a light bulb".

.. image:: images/create_matter_accessory_add_temperature_measurement.png

|
| Save the file and exit.

| Created ZAP file will be used to generate C++ code containing selected clusters.
| In order to generate this code in :file:`src/gen/` run: 
.. code-block:: 
        
        $MATTER_ROOT/scripts/tools/zap/generate.py src/template.zap
       
At this point, new clusters have been added to your Matter accessory. 

Main application
****************

| Adding clusters alone is not enough to properly model sensor's behaviour.
| Next step in creating a sensor is changing a way in which an application will interact with newly added clusters. 
| The easiest way to do it is to modify :file:`src/app_task.cpp`, which contains main loop of the application.

Event queue
===========

| Main application loop is based on an queue on which events are posted by ZCL callbacks, application itself or other entities, like Zephyr timers.
| In each iteration an event is dequeued and a corresponding event handler is called.

Events
------

| In a template sample application events are representing:

#. Pressing Button 1.
#. Releasing Button 1.
#. Factory reset timeout.

> To model behaviour of a sensor we need to add three new events:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To model behaviour of a sensor you need to add three new events:
```

#. Sensor activation.
#. Sensor deactivation.
#. Sensor measurement.

| Add new events to ``EventType`` in :file:`src/app_event.h`, for example:
.. code-block:: C++
        
        enum EventType : uint8_t { FunctionPress, FunctionRelease, FunctionTimer, SensorActivate, SensorDeactivate, SensorMeasure};

Timers
------

| One way to make sure that sensor is making measurements in desired time points is to use a Zephyr timer to post ``SensorMeasure`` events.
| In Template sample such a timer is being used in order to countdown 6 seconds of **Button 1** being pressed to initiate factory reset.

New timer for a measurement event can be added in a similar way:

.. code-block:: C++

        k_timer sSensorTimer;        

        void SensorTimerHandler(k_timer *timer)
        {
                GetAppTask().PostEvent(AppEvent{ AppEvent::SensorMeasure });
        }
        
        void StartSensorTimer(uint32_t aTimeoutMs)
        {

> 	        k_timer_start(&sSensorTimer, K_MSEC(aTimeoutMs), K_NO_WAIT);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	        k_timer_start(&sSensorTimer, K_MSEC(aTimeoutMs), K_MSEC(aTimeoutMs));
```
We don't want the timer to be one-shot. Then you wouldn't need to re-start it on each timeout.

        }

        int AppTask::Init()
        {
                /*
                 .      Original content       
                 */

                k_timer_init(&sSensorTimer, &SensorTimerHandler, nullptr);
                k_timer_user_data_set(&sSensorTimer, this);

                StartSensorTimer(500);
                return 0;
        }

        
Now every time ``StartSensorTimer(TIMEOUT);`` is called, then after ``TIMEOUT`` milliseconds ``SensorMeasure`` event will be added to the event queue.

Event Handlers:
---------------

| When an event is dequeued the event handler function is called.
| New events have been added, so corresponding handlers should be implemented, for example (``sensorActive`` will be application variable indicating whether sensor is active):
.. code-block:: C++

        void AppTask::SensorActivateHandler()
        {

> 	        sensorActive = true;

Reviewer: I would add this variable declaration on the top of the code and change name to `sSensorActive` to follow the convention of naming global variables.

Reviewer 2: I think that this handler could just start the timer and the one below stop it. No additional variable would be needed then.

        }

        void AppTask::SensorDeactivateHandler()
        {
	        sensorActive = false;
        }

        void AppTask::SensorMeasureHandler()
        {
	        if(sensorActive)

> 		        emberAfTemperatureMeasurementClusterSetMeasuredValueCallback(1, int16_t(rand()));

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                 emberAfTemperatureMeasurementClusterSetMeasuredValueCallback(/* endpoint ID */ 1, /* temperature in 0.01*C */ int16_t(rand() % 5000));
```
or document in a different way what the parameters are.

	        StartSensorTimer(500);
        }

        
When SensorMeasureHandler is called then TemperatureMeasurement cluster's attribute is updated by calling a function from :file:`$MATTER_ROOT/src/app/clusters/temperature-measurement-server.cpp`.
Because new timer is started every time last timer expires, then SensorMeasureHandler will be called every half a second and will update a value if a sensor is active.
In this example value is updated randomly, but in a real sensor application it would be updated with a value obtained from external measurement.  

> Don't forget to declare these handler functions in :file:`src/app_task.h` for a proper build.

Reviewer 2: Would calling `StartSensorTimer` directly in the `DispatchEvent` method remove the need for these declarations? Maybe it's worth if they're one-liners?

It can only be changed externally, for example through Matter controller.

However, sensor application needs to know how this attribute is changing, so there is a need to implement a callback function to post one of these events every time OnOff attribute changes.
To see a list of callback functions that are customizable one can open :file:`src/gen/callback-stub.cpp` and look for functions with ``__attribute__((weak))``.      
It is sufficient just to implement ``emberAfPostAttributeChangeCallback`` (read the description in :file:`src/gen/callback-stub.cpp`).

In order to do it, create a new file, for example :file:`src/zcl_callbacks.cpp` and implement a callback inside it.
A simple exemplary implementation might look like this:     

.. code-block:: C++

        #include "app_task.h"
        #include <app/util/af.h>

        using namespace ::chip;

        void emberAfPostAttributeChangeCallback(EndpointId endpoint, ClusterId clusterId, AttributeId attributeId, uint8_t mask,
                                                uint16_t manufacturerCode, uint8_t type, uint16_t size, uint8_t *value)

>         {

Reviewer 2: Return if the modified cluster is not on/off or the modified attribute is not on/off?

                GetAppTask().PostEvent(AppEvent(*value ? AppEvent::SensorActivate : AppEvent::SensorDeactivate));
        }
                

Add new targets to CMakelists
*****************************

Now, to allow a proper build, update CMakelists.txt file.

Add the following targets:

#. :file:`$MATTER_ROOT/src/app/clusters/on-off-server/on-off-server.cpp` - for OnOff cluster callbacks.
#. :file:`$MATTER_ROOT/src/app/clusters/temperature-measurement-server/temperature-measurement-server.cpp` - for TemperatureMeasurement cluster callbacks.
#. :file:`src/zcl_callbacks.cpp` - to include our callback implementation.

> Don't forget to include:

Reviewer 2: I would move that part to the section about modifying `app_task.cpp`.

.. code-block::
        
        #include <app/clusters/on-off-server/on-off-server.h>
        #include <app/clusters/temperature-measurement-server/temperature-measurement-server.h>

in :file:`src/app_task.cpp` file.

Testing sensor application
**************************

In order to check if sensor device works correctly complete following steps:

> #. Commision device using Matter controller.

Reviewer: Maybe I don't know the full context of this guide, but for me some reference to commissioning guide is missing. I can imagine that somebody will get here from some weird location (e.g. Google browser) and will be a bit confused how to commission the device and invoke commands to the controller, so please consider adding a link to it in case you find it beneficial too.

Reviewer 2: I think we can refer to the Matter Template here as well. The commissioning should be no different for the new sample.

> #. Activate the sensor by running ``On`` command on the OnOff cluster.

Reviewer 2: I think we should provide full commands here such as `zcl OnOff On 1 1 0`.
